feat(lit-dev-content): add lit-with-tailwind guide (#1278)
lit/lit.dev: packages/lit-dev-content/site/articles/article/lit-with-tailwind.md

see two new files appear as mentioned before.

## Expressions in styles (dynamic styles)

You may have noticed one thing we have lost by having our CSS in external
files: we can no longer template variables into our CSS like so:

```ts
static styles = css`
  .foo {
    color: ${dynamicColourDefinedInJs};
  }
`;
```

There are many challenges in supporting this usage and still passing it through
tailwind. For this reason, **it is not recommended**.

Instead, in places we really need to do this, we should use CSS variables or
do the computation statically at build-time (replace values in our CSS at
build time).

To solve this with CSS variables, we can do the following:

`my-element.css`:

```css
.foo {
  color: var(--foo-color);
}
```

`my-element.ts`:

```ts
static styles = [
  css`
    :host {
      --foo-color: ${dynamicColour};
    }
  `,
  myElementStyles
];
```

The initial `styles` entry in this case is only being used for setting the
values of some CSS variables, and never used for actual styling. We can then
reference those variables in our external CSS files.

## Example

An example repository very similar to this guide is available here:

> https://github.com/43081j/tailwind-lit-example

Reviewer: can we do a link that's like:

```
[Source](https://github.com/43081j/tailwind-lit-example)
[Live demo](https://githubblitz.com/43081j/tailwind-lit-example)
```

All you would also need to do is have a `start` npm command that starts a server so that we can serve it like with WDS

lastUpdated: 2023-12-10
summary: Using tailwind styles inside Lit components
tags:
  - web-components
  - tailwind
  - css
eleventyNavigation:
  parent: Articles
  key: Lit with tailwind
  order: 0
author:
  - james-garbutt
---

Tailwind and many other CSS libraries were not designed with web components in
mind, and come with some non-obvious difficulties when trying to use them in
such a codebase.

This is a brief guide on how to use such a library with your Lit components.

## Why tailwind doesn't work out of the box

Out of the box, tailwind basically provides some global CSS classes and injects
the associated CSS at build time (via postcss).

This conflicts with how web components work, since each web component has its
own natively scoped stylesheet rather than inherting any global styles. This
is why Tailwind will not be much use to us without further setup.

## Overview of solution

To solve the gaps tailwind comes with, we will:

- Inject tailwind styles into regular CSS files
- Use [import attributes](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-import-attributes)
to import those CSS files
- Use [esbuild](https://github.com/evanw/esbuild) to pull those CSS files

> into the bundle or same output directory

Reviewer 2: So I'm not too familiar with features in this area and this is more for my understanding of what's going on.

Looking at the output from the example repo, esbuild produces this line in the bundle
```js
import styles from "./hello-world-4K4DCJGM.css" assert { type: "css" };
```

esbuild is being used to bundle and move the css files into the outdir and is it then left up to the users to make this work on unsupported browsers? We probably need a loud caveat stating this only works in Chrome if that's the case. Can `es-module-shims` be used to make it work for other browser?

Might there be rollup plugins that work with the new correct import attribute syntax?

Reviewer 2: hmmm... latest esbuild actually does support import attributes with the `with` keyword. https://github.com/evanw/esbuild/releases/tag/v0.19.7

https://github.com/evanw/esbuild/issues/3384#issuecomment-1823412482 Evan does say `type: 'css'` support will come to esbuild eventually but perhaps a plugin can be written for it in the mean time?

Author: yeah pretty much, right now it just outputs the source as-is (i.e. your browser needs to support import assertions at least, ideally attributes too).

the esbuild blockage is because of no support for CSS. you're right though, we may be able to use a plugin, i'll have a dig around

it'd be nice to not have to use rollup, just because it consumes most of the build whereas esbuild focuses on only the bundling (as in we should also do the tailwind preprocessing in rollup, if we use rollup).

Reviewer 2: that makes sense. i don't disagree with the tool choice and i don't want to block or dictate too much as to what this article should say.

since this article being the first of its kind, i think it would be good to convey to the reader that this is meant as _one_ way to solve this problem, with caveats like browser support, and mention alternatives (even without details) like using rollup plugins for all the steps. being published on lit.dev, people might consider this the only recommended way otherwise.

Reviewer: Heya, seeing how `with` is shipped in chrome now + TS 5.4 supporting it, can we switch to `with`?

until esbuild implements full support for the new standard.

We can do this like so:

```ts
import myElementStyles from './my-element.css' assert {type: 'css'}

class MyElement extends LitElement {
  static styles = myElementStyles;

  render() {
    return html`
      <span class="italic">I am italic tailwind text</span>
    `;
  }
}
```

As you can see, we want to our `my-element.css` file to contain tailwind
mixins, and we want to use the resulting classes in our element's `render`
method.

The CSS file (`my-element.css`) would look like this:

```css
@tailwind base;
@tailwind utilities;

/* other custom CSS here */
```

We will then use tailwind to replace those mixins with CSS, including only
the styles our `render` method referenced.

## Configuring tailwind and postcss

Before we run our build, we need to configure tailwind and postcss.

In our `tailwind.config.js`, we can write:

```ts
/** @type {import('tailwindcss').Config} */
export default {
  content: [
    './src/**/*.ts'
  ],
  theme: {
    extend: {},
  },
  plugins: [],
}
```

In our case, our sources are TypeScript, so we have the initial `@type` comment

> to give us auto-completion for the object's properties.

Author: i think you're right and it makes sense to remove it, just because tailwind already uses it in their examples anyway and it seems out of scope for this article

> The rest of this file is straight forward. The important part is `content`,
> specifying where our sources are so tailwind can detect which classes we have
> used.

Reviewer 2: I'm not a huge fan of saying something is "straight forward" just in case it's not straight forward for some readers.

```suggestion
Tailwind [configuration](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/configuration) can be modified to fit your use case. The important part is for `content` to specify where our component sources are so tailwind can detect which classes we have used.
```
